  ______   ______     ______     __
 /\  ___\ /\  ___\   /\  ___\   /\ \___
 \ \  __\ \ \  __\   \ \ \____  \ \  __ \
  \ \_\    \ \_____\  \ \_____\  \ \_\ \_\
   \/_/     \/_____/   \/_____/   \/_/\/_/

Fech makes it easy to parse electronic campaign filings[http://query.nictusa.com/pres/], House candidate filings, PAC filings and independent expenditure filings[http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/ie_reports.shtml] from the Federal Election Commission. It lets you access filing attributes the same way regardless of filing version, and works as a framework for cleaning and filing data.

Fech supports several FEC form types, including all F1 (Statements of organization), F3 (House candidate filings), F3P (presidential filings), F5 (independent expenditures), F24 (24/48 hour notices of independent expenditures), F56 (contributions to independent expenditure committees) F57 (expenditures by independent expenditure committees), F3X (filings by unauthorized committees) and F9 (electioneering communications).

== News

* Feb. 13, 2012: Version 0.8.0 released. Layouts for form 3 and form 1 added, for parsing House candidate committee filings.
* Feb. 11, 2012: Version 0.7.0 released. Layouts for form 9 added, for parsing electioneering communications filings.
* Jan. 28, 2012: Version 0.6.0 released. Added support for quoted fields.
* Nov. 22, 2011: Version 0.5.0 released. Layouts for form 3X added, for parsing filings from non-candidate committees.
* Nov. 13, 2011: Version 0.3.0 released. Layouts for forms 24, 5, 56 and 57 added, for parsing independent expenditure filings.
* Nov. 4, 2011: Version 0.2.1 released. Bug-fix release to address a problem with the :include option for selecting only certain columns. Thanks to Aaron Bycoffe for the report and patch.

== Installation

Install Fech as a gem:

  gem install fech
  
For use in a Rails 3 application, put the following in your Gemfile:

  gem 'fech'

then issue the 'bundle install' command. Fech has been tested under Ruby 1.8.7, 1.9.2 and JRuby 1.6.3.

== Getting Started

Start by creating a Filing object that corresponds to an electronic filing from the FEC. You'll then have to download the file before parsing it:

  filing = Fech::Filing.new(723604)
  filing.download

* Pass in the FEC filing id
* Optional arguments: pass in a :quote_char argument, and Fech will use it as a quote character to parse the file (see details below). Specify the :download_dir on initialization to set where filings are stored. Otherwise, they'll go into a temp folder on your filesystem.

=== Summary Data

To get summary data for the filing (various aggregate amounts, stats about the filing):

  filing.summary
  #=> {:coverage_from_date=>"20110101", :coverage_from_date=>"20110301", ... }

Returns a named hash of all attributes available for the filing. (Which fields are available can vary depending on the filing version number.)

=== Accessing specific line items

To grab every row in the filing of a certain type (all Schedule A items, for example):

  filing.rows_like(/^sa/)
  #=> [{:transaction_id=>"SA17.XXXX", :contribution_date>"20110101" ... } ... ]

This will return an array of hashes, one hash for each row found in the filing whose line number matches the regular expression you passed in. (SA17s and SA18s would both be returned in this example). You can also pass in strings for exact matches.

When given a block, .rows_like will yield a single hash at a time:

  filing.rows_like(/^sa/) do |contribution|
    contribution.transaction_id
    #=> {:transaction_id=>"SA17.XXXX", :contribution_date>"20110101" ... }
  end

== Usage

=== Accessing specific fields

By default, .rows_like will process every field in the matched rows (some rows have 200+ fields). You can speed up performance significantly by asking for just the subset of fields you need.

  filing.rows_like(/^sa/, :include => [:transaction_id]) do |contribution|
    contribution
    #=> {:transaction_id=>"SA17.XXXX"}
  end

=== Raw data

If you want to access the raw arrays of row data, pass :raw => true to .rows_like or any of its shortcuts:

  filing.contributions(:raw => true)
  #=> [["SA17A", "C00XXXXXX", "SA17.XXXX", nil, nil, "IND" ... ], ... ]
  
  filing.contributions(:raw => true) do |row|
    #row => ["SA17A", "C00XXXXX", "SA17.XXXX", nil, nil, "IND" ... ]
  end

The source maps for individual row types and versions may also be accessed directly:

  Fech::Filing.map_for("sa")
  Fech::Filing.map_for(/sa/, :version => 6.1)
  #=> [:form_type, :filer_committee_id_number, :transaction_id ... ]

You can then bypass some of the overhead of Fech if you're building something more targeted.

=== Converting / Preprocessing data

For performing bulk actions on specific types of fields, you can register "translations" which will manipulate specific data under certain conditions.

An example: dates within filings are formatted as YYYYMMDD. To automatically convert all Schedule B :expenditure_date values to native Ruby Dates:

  filing.translate do |t|
    t.convert(:row => /^sb/, :field => :expenditure_date) { |v| Date.parse(v) }
  end

The block you give .convert will be given the original value of that field when it is run. After you run .convert, any time you parse a row beginning with "SB", the :expenditure_date value will be a Date object.

The :field parameter can also be a regular expression:

  filing.translate do |t|
    t.convert(:row => /^f3p/, :field => /^coverage_.*_date/) { |v| Date.parse(v) }
  end

Now, both :coverage_from_date and :coverage_through_date will be automatically cast to dates.

You can leave off any or all of the parameters (row, field, version) for more broad adoption of the translation.

=== Derived Fields

You may want to perform the same calculation on many rows of data (contributions minus refunds to create a net value, for example). This can be done without cluttering up your more app-specific parsing code by using a .combine translation. The translation blocks you pass .combine receive the entire row as their context, not just a single value. The :field parameter becomes what you want the new value to be named.

  filing.translate do |t|
    t.combine(:row => :f3pn, :field => :net_individual_contributions) do |row|
      contribs = row.col_a_individual_contribution_total.to_f
      refunds = row.col_a_total_contributions_refunds.to_f
      contribs - refunds
    end
  end

In this example, every parsed Schedule A row would contain an attribute not found in the original filing data - :net_individual_contributions - which contains the result of the calculation above. The values used to construct combinations will have already been run through any .convert translations you've specified.

=== Built-in translations

There are two sets of translations that come with Fech for some of the more common needs:
 * Breaking apart names into their component parts and joining them back together, depending on which the filing provides
 * Converting date field strings to Ruby Date objects

You can mix these translations into your parser when you create it:

  filing = Fech::Filing.new(723604, :translate => [:names, :dates])

Just be aware that as you add more translations, the parsing will start to take slightly longer (although having translations that aren't used will not slow it down).

=== Aliasing fields

You can allow any field (converted, combined, or untranslated) to have an arbitrary number of aliases. For example, you could alias the F3P line's :col_a_6_cash_on_hand_beginning_period to the more manageable :cash_beginning

  filing.translate do |t|
    t.alias :cash_beginning, :col_a_cash_on_hand_beginning_period, :f3p
  end
  
  filing.summary.cash_beginning == filing.summary.col_a_cash_on_hand_beginning_period.
  #=> true

We found it useful to be able to access attributes using the name the fields in our database they correspond to.

=== Quote character

By default, Fech, like FasterCSV and CSV, assumes that double quotes are used around values that contain reserved characters.

However, the parsing of some filings might fail because of the existence of the default quote character in a field. To get around this, you may pass a :quote_char argument, and Fech will use it to parse the file.

For example, filing No. 756218 has the following value in the field for the contributor's last name:

  O""Leary

Attempting to parse this filing with Fech fails because of illegal quoting.

Since the FEC doesn't use a quote character in its electronic filings, we don't need a quote character at all. One way to achieve this is to use "\0" (a null ASCII character) as :quote_char:

  filing = Fech::Filing.new(756218, :quote_char => "\0")

== Warnings

Filings can contain data that is incomplete or wrong: contributions might be in excess of legal limits, or data may have just been entered incorrectly. While some of these mistakes are corrected in later filing amendments, you should be aware that the data is not perfect. Fech will only return data as accurate as the source.

When filings get very large, be careful not to perform operations that attempt to transform many rows in memory.

== Supported row types and versions

The following row types are currently supported from filing version 3 through 8.0:
* F1 (Statement of Organization)
* F3
* F3P (Summaries)
* F3PS
* F3S
* F3P31 (Items to be Liquidated)
* F3X (Report of Receipts and Disbursements for Other Than an Authorized Committee)
* F24 (24/48 Hour Notice of Independent Expenditure)
* F5 (Report of Independent Expenditures Made and Contributions Received)
* F56 (Contributions for Independent Expenditures)
* F57 (Independent Expenditures)
* F9 (Electioneering Communications, first appeared in filing version 5.0)
* SA (Contributions)
* SB (Expenditures)
* SC (Loans)
* SC1
* SC2
* SD (Debts & Obligations)
* SE (Independent Expenditures)
* SF (Coordinated Expenditures)

== Authors

Michael Strickland, michael.strickland@nytimes.com

Evan Carmi, evan@ecarmi.org

Aaron Bycoffe, bycoffe@huffingtonpost.com

Derek Willis, dwillis@nytimes.com

Daniel Pritchett, daniel@sharingatwork.com

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2012 The New York Times Company. See LICENSE for details.
